---
title: "PuppetDB 2.0 » API » Commands"
layout: default
canonical: "/puppetdb/latest/api/commands.html"
---

[factsv1]: ./wire_format/facts_format_v1.html
[catalogv1]: ./wire_format/catalog_format_v1.html
[reportv1]: ./wire_format/report_format_v1.html
[factsv2]: ./wire_format/facts_format_v2.html
[catalogv4]: ./wire_format/catalog_format_v4.html
[reportv3]: ./wire_format/report_format_v3.html

Commands are used to change PuppetDB's
model of a population. Commands are represented by `command objects`,
which have the following JSON wire format:

    {"command": "...",
     "version": 123,
     "payload": <json object>}

`command` is a string identifying the command.

`version` is a JSON integer describing what version of the given
command you're attempting to invoke. The version of the command
also indicates the version of the wire format to use for the command.

`payload` must be a valid JSON object of any sort. It's up to an
individual handler function to determine how to interpret that object.

The entire command MUST be encoded as UTF-8.

## Command submission

Commands are submitted via HTTP to the `/commands` URL and must
conform to the following rules:

* A `POST` is used
* The `POST` body must contain the JSON payload.
* There is an `Accept` header that matches `application/json`.
* The content-type is `application/json`.

Optionally, there may be a query parameter, `checksum`, that contains a SHA-1 hash of
the payload which will be used for verification.

When a command is successfully submitted, the submitter will
receive the following:

* A response code of 200
* A content-type of `application/json`
* A response body in the form of a JSON object, containing a single key 'uuid', whose
  value is a UUID corresponding to the submitted command. This can be used, for example, by
  clients to correlate submitted commands with server-side logs.

The terminus plugins for puppet masters use this command API to update facts, catalogs, and reports for nodes. 

## Command Semantics

Commands are processed _asynchronously_. If PuppetDB returns a 200
when you submit a command, that only indicates that the command has
been _accepted_ for processing. There are no guarantees as to when
that command will be processed, nor that when it is processed it will
be successful.

Commands that fail processing will be stored in files in the "dead
letter office", located under the MQ data directory, in
`discarded/<command>`. These files contain the command and diagnostic
information that may be used to determine why the command failed to be
processed.

## List of Commands

### "replace catalog", version 1

> **Note:** This version is deprecated, use the latest version instead.

The payload is expected to be a Puppet catalog, as a JSON string, including the
fields of the [catalog wire format v1][catalogv1]. Extra fields are
ignored.

### "replace catalog", version 2

> **Note:** This version is deprecated, use the latest version instead.

The payload is expected to be a Puppet catalog, as either a JSON string or an
object, conforming exactly to the [catalog wire
format v1][catalogv1]. Extra or missing fields are an error.

### "replace catalog", version 3

> **Note:** This version is deprecated, use the latest version instead.

This version of the command introduces the new `transaction-uuid` field.  This
value is generated by Puppet and can be used, e.g., to correlate a report with
the exact catalog that was used for the run.  All previous versions of the
`replace catalog` command will store a `null` value for this field.

The payload is expected to be a Puppet catalog, as either a JSON string or an
object, conforming exactly to the [catalog wire
format v1][catalogv4]. Extra or missing fields are an error.

### "replace catalog", version 4

The key change to version 4 is adding support for environments. This
value will be populated by Puppet. This version also explicitly
couples the version of the command with the same version of the wire
format. Other changes in this version were related to removing unused
metadata fields added by puppet.

The payload is expected to be a Puppet catalog, as either a JSON
string or an object, conforming exactly to the [catalog wire format v4][catalog].
Extra or missing fields are an error.

### "replace facts", version 1

> **Note:** This version is deprecated, use the latest version instead.

The payload is expected to be a set of facts, as a JSON string, conforming to
the [fact wire format v1][facts]

### "replace facts", version 2

Similar to version 4 of replace catalog, this version of replace facts adds support
for environments and an explicit coupling between command version and wire format
version. See [fact wire format v2][factsv2] for more information on the payload of
this command


### "deactivate node", version 1

The payload is expected to be the name of a node, as a JSON string, which will be deactivated
effective as of the time the command is *processed*.

### "store report", version 1

> **Note:** This version is deprecated, use the latest version instead.

The payload is expected to be a report, containing events that occurred on Puppet
resources.  It is structured as a JSON object, conforming to the
[report wire format v1][reportv1].


### "store report", version 2

> **Note:** This version is deprecated, use the latest version instead.

This version of the command introduces support for the `transaction-uuid`,
`file`, `line`, and `containment-path` fields.

The payload is expected to be a report, containing events that occurred on Puppet
resources.  It is structured as a JSON object, conforming to the
[report wire format v1][reportv1].

### "store report", version 3

Similar to replace catalog version 4, this version of store report adds support
for environments and creates an explicit link between command version and wire
format version. This is a backward compatable change with version 2.

The payload is expected to be a report, containing events that occurred on Puppet
resources.  It is structured as a JSON object, conforming to the
[report wire format v3][reportv3].

## Examples using curl

To post a `replace facts` command you can use the following curl command:

    curl -X POST \
      -H "Accept: application/json" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{"command":"replace facts","version":1,"payload":"{\"name\":\"test1\",\"values\":{\"myfact\":\"myvalue\"}}"}' \
      http://localhost:8080/v3/commands

An example of `deactivate node`:

    curl -X POST \
      -H "Accept: application/json" \
      -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
      -d '{"command":"deactivate node","version":1,"payload":"\"test1\""}' \
      http://localhost:8080/v3/commands
=======
